To, uh, present your petition, uh,
to the committee and speak on it.
We've got you, uh, with us this morning for 15 minutes.
Mm-hmm. Uh, including any time for questions.
So it's up to you how you want to use the time.
So I'll hand over to you to start
to introduce yourself to the committee.
Okay. Um, modern everyone.
My name is Tuda and I'm a 15-year-old student at Wat
College in West Auckland.
Um, I've been involved, sorry. It's
All good.
Matilda, start again. Is it,
Is it good? No.
Uh, you know, the mic is for anyone online.
It doesn't actually include the volume in the room,
so the more you speak up, the more everyone can hear. Okay.
Yeah. Okay. I'll go again. Um, more than everyone.
My name is Matilda and I'm a year 11 student at
Makati College in West Stockland.
I've been involved in this issue for about a year and a half
after noticing the positive impacts the free school lunch
program had on schools and in students in particular, um,
after the budget cuts this year,
the impacts on students at schools was astounding.
The amount of lunches eaten dropped from 80% in our school
to 50% because of the budget cuts to the lunches.
It's more cost effective to provide good quality meals
that provide students with enough nutrition to learn than
with poor quality meals that do not.
Students struggle to learn on an empty stomach,
and that inhibits the chances of being able to contribute
to society in the workforce
'cause of this chance of passing.
NCEA, the scheme has been proven
to work in other OECD countries like the uk, France, Japan,
and the USA, which have universal preschool lunch schemes.
In those countries, they spend around $6 per student,
which gives around 30%
of the daily nutrition needs international
to the international standard.
In New Zealand, the $3 lunch program only provides 18%
of daily nutrition, and
that is not enough for a student to learn.
The prac that these other OECD countries are providing free
school lunches to university to all students, proves
that they're good value for money,
and that they see the value they have for the workforce
and for the country at large,
the $3 lunches are not working.
They do not meet the bar to help student education.
Instead, we should follow the lead
of the other OECD countries
because it is proven to help students learn better when the
nutritional needs are met.
That requires $6 per lunch.
This government has put a lot
of money into attendance rates,
providing free school lunches takes away barriers from
students attending school when
they might not get food at home.
There are also other benefits. There's a mental health.
When the AKA Pro program was introduced,
there was a mental health increase
amongst already food insecure individuals from
between nine and 20%.
And because mental health is such a difficult,
complex problem to solve something
that can provide an in mental health increase
of 20% is astounding.
And a mental health crisis.
After living in a community like Westland for my whole life,
and seeing people in poverty
and being friends with people in poverty, going to school
with them, you can see the impacts it has,
and you can see how much this means to them.
But the three school lunch, three school lunches,
the $3 ones don't, they just don't work.
And it's sending these people
who need the lunches more than anybody
else into more poverty.
And yeah.
Ians is there anything else you'd like to add before we go
To? No
questions. The questions?
Okay, great. Um, Shannon Kilda, um, thank you very much
for your contribution today.
I guess my, my, um, question for you is, is what's the,
you know, the decisions of government here
to cut back school lunches?
What sort of message do you think that that sends
to students and what have they told you?
I think it just sends the message
that the government doesn't care enough about us to
invest in money.
Invest money that does real good.
We can see from students, we can see the impacts it has
and people from government might not be able to see it
because you have to be on the ground
to see the impacts it has.
But as a student, you can see it in school,
you can see it in the community, you can see the impacts.
It has, like, I remember last year, the lunches
that weren't Eden, they were given to the
near the local homeless shelters to help them.
So it was really a community-wide impacts it had, but now
because they're not being eaten
and said the quota of our school is going down,
and so there's not extra lunches
to be given to the community.
So yeah, I really think it sends the message
that the government doesn't care, doesn't,
isn't doing the things that they need to do
to help students' education.
Especially when you're talking about attendance rates.
They're talking about NCA
and it feels like this is a really good way
to tackle problems like that.
But then they stash the budget and, yeah,
Builder. Thank you.
Yeah. Yes. So thank you for your submission.
So if you were to add, uh, two meals to the lunch program,
what would those meals be? Um,
At the moment there's a lot of butter, chicken and mints,
and I think it would be quite nice to eat
small variation from that.
Um, I don't know.
I couldn't say personally,
I don't eat the lunches very often
'cause I don't, they don't taste good enough to eat a lot
of the time, so you'd probably have to ask other students
and see what they think to get their views.
I don't know, personally, look
Full trip. Yeah.
Thanks Matilda. Um, you know your fellow students
and you've been following this issue the whole time, um,
over the last year and a half.
What do they, what do the students, if,
if they were all here, let's say the room was full
of your fellow students Yeah.
And we asked them what they think
of food since the cuts were made, what would they say?
Well, I did a survey recently of students at my school,
and I got some comments at the bottom of the survey.
And I think some of them were,
I don't even think my cat would eat it.
The smell is rancid.
Um, one of them said in medieval times,
this would be a punishment, having to eat chalky curry
and bread like this.
Every day I have the full list of comments
that I can send them later, like,
because yeah, they're really quite open eyeopening
that the students don't enjoy them and don't wanna eat them.
So yeah, it's not just me coming against.
And could you, um, could you confirm the committee
what happened to the percentage uptake?
How many students were, uh,
taking the lunches beforehand, before the cuts?
So, and how many after?
At my school, um,
because the deputy principal, who's the pastoral, um,
leader, she changes the quota we received to fit demand.
And last year with the program, there were 80%
of students were being
provided for with the lunches to fit demand.
But this year that's gone down to 50%,
which I think really shows students aren't eating them,
and that really does have impacts on their education
and their future work outcomes.
Everything.
Yeah. Yeah. So, um, Matilda, I, I know your school well,
but could you, um, uh, give the committee a bit of a sense
of the socioeconomic Yeah.
Kind of range in the school?
So it's a D South three school in
Henderson, west Auckland.
We have the 2000 students.
It's, the population's been really expanding recently.
Um, it's, I think 50% is Maori Pacifica,
25% European, and then 25% other ethnicities.
So yeah, it's really broad range.
And it's true, isn't it, that, um,
there are quite a number of your fellow students
for whom the, the lunch, uh, program offered really the only
before the cuts really the only nutritious meal of the day.
Yeah. Sad. Sadly, in
Fact isn't true in it.
Yeah, it is true. And because the new lunches only provide
18% of their daily nutrition,
that's might be the only meal they get that day.
Only 18%
of their nutrition is delivered, and that's not enough.
Thanks, Matilda, for coming to the committee
and presenting a couple of questions coming out of, uh,
things that you've said today.
One is, how do you feel about the fact
that there are significantly larger numbers
of students across New Zealand
that are receiving the lunches this year compared
to last year because, uh, there's been able to be a spread
of the number of students getting it
because of the work done by the minister? Yeah,
I think that's really good and
I think that's what it should be.
But I think the lunches that are delivered should be at a
high enough quality with students who actually eat them
and enjoy them and positively benefit off them.
Because if lunches are being delivered to students
who won't eat them, that's just a waste
of food and time and money.
And so, yeah, I think it's good that it's being spread.
And in other countries like that, provide them,
like the UK Japan who provide universal preschool lunches,
they give it to every single student in
their, in their country.
And I think that's really significant
and I think that's something we should try and follow,
but with lunches that are high enough standard
for students to actually eat.
Thank you. And, uh, just a follow up question on your
school, we've seen attendance results across the
country increase over the last year.
Mm-hmm. Do you know what the attendance,
attendance rates are at your school
and what's happened over the last year?
I do not know. Sorry. Okay. We spoke
Too much.
Can I ask the supplementary on the attendance,
because one of the,
Hold on, hold on. I just wanna see
if there was an,
An answer. Just,
uh, you could say what Ms.
Fugman told you about attendance.
Oh, yeah. Um, so she said, Ms.
Fugman is my deputy principal.
She was talking, we interviewed her about the lunches
and she was talking about how the, well,
after they began providing lunches to schools,
there was an increase in attendance at my school.
And also that, um, if the lunches program was cut entirely,
that that would be detrimental on attendance
and also student welfare, just
Generally. Okay. So that's
interesting.
I'd be interested in the actual school data Yeah.
For your school. Know
My supplementary, what's around the impact that the
KO has on attendance
and your experience of that in your, um, school.
So that was okay. She just clarified that and answered that.
Um, grant McCullum. Yeah.
Yeah. Hi. Um, thank, thank you
for coming all the way down.
Good on you. Um, question.
So you, you mentioned that the amount of that
with the changes that the number of students went from 80%
to 50% approximately Yeah.
Having the school lunches.
So those that, what are those children doing
that weren't students doing that?
Weren't that now aren't, are they bringing their own lunch
to school or what's happening?
A lot of people, they wouldn't, a lot
of people don't bring their own lunch to school,
so they just wouldn't be eating much at all
because tuk shop's quite expensive,
so people will just go hungry over the day.
A lot of people don't eat breakfast either,
so it really is like, you'd, you'd get to school
and maybe you'd have take some food for someone else
and then you'd go home and have dinner and that would be it.
So, yeah.
Okay. Now other questions?
Good submission. Thank you so much for taking the time.
Thank you for, come down to Wellington
and to present to the committee, uh, on your petition.
All done on the work. Mahi, you've done the petition.
Thank you so much. Done committee.
We're now moving, um, to the petition of Catherine.
Uh, five minutes. Sure. Can we do some follow up? Okay.
So, um, I can ask Catherine to join us, um,
at the table, the middle here.
Morning, Catherine. We'll just wait
for the committee clerk Yeah.
To come back in. No problem. And, um,
we've got 15 minutes with you this morning.
Thank you. Uh, including any time for questions. Yes.
So I'll hand over to you. Uh, feel free to add
to your submission, uh, to your petition, uh,
anything that you'd like, and then mm-hmm.
Um, some questions would be
Great. Yeah. Thank
you. Uh, so my name is Catherine Lamont,
and I'm the initiator of the petition calling
for equal a CC coverage to volunteer firefighters.
Uh, the petition was supported by 36
and a half thousand New Zealanders, uh, and it was presented
and tabled in parliament on the 6th of May.
The petition comes from both lived experience
and widespread community concern.
Uh, I started this
after witnessing, uh, the devastating impact
that PTSD had on a local volunteer filing.
Um, sorry.
Uh, he was left without financial support
and without the ability to work
because of his PTSD diagnosis.
And he did not qualify under our current a CC coverage.
Uh, volunteer firefighters are the backbone
of fire and emergency.
They make up 86% of FES workforce.
They cover 93% of our land mass,
and they attend to the majority of series incidents.
So into 2023, volunteers attended 70%
of all motor vehicle accidents, 71% of medical emergencies,
and 81% of vegetation fires.
They are carrying the workload for fes,
Despite carrying the same risks, the same responsibilities,
and completing the same core training as their paid via
as their paid counterparts.
They are excluded from full a CC protections,
and it is not a sustainable way forward.
Uh, this petition really speaks to fairness and equality.
So volunteers are doing the same training
as their paid firefighters.
They are held to the same professional standards across
their communities, and we ask them
to serve in a professional way,
and we must protect them through our laws.
They respond to the same high risk incidents.
They are exposed to the same carcinogens,
they carry the same psychological burden,
and yet under a CC, they are excluded from cover
for the gradual process injuries,
occupational illnesses and mental trauma.
Trauma does not differentiate between paid and unpaid roles.
Volunteer firefighters are essential
to New Zealand's emergency response.
They are not a nice to have.
They provide an estimated $800 million worth
of service annually
and unpaid labor hours, a contribution
that would be impossible to replace
for the fully paid workforce.
Our volunteer firefighters are the first responders in their
communities, and without them, large parts
of New Zealand would be left without effective foreign
emergency coverage.
And if we continue to ask our volunteer firefighters
to bear an unfair personal cost, we risk losing them
and without them a cornerstone
of our emergency response system.
This petition speaks to the value
that we place on volunteer firefighters.
They are expected and required.
New Zealanders expect our volunteer firefighters to respond
24 hours of the day, seven days a week,
365 days of the year.
They are formally recognized in the Foreign Emergency
New Zealand Act as personnel
of funds alongside employees and contractors.
The FES Act already recognizes the unique role of volunteers
and the A CC Act should align with this.
There is no other volunteer group in New Zealand
that has this formal recognition within a Crown entity
and this unique status justifies ring fencing these people
within the A CC Act.
There is overwhelming public
and political support for this change.
It is not a partisan issue.
It is about fairness, recogni recognition,
and doing the right thing.
If we continue to ask volunteers
to pay this high personal price for being volunteer firemen,
and we continue to leave them unprotected in crucial areas,
they may cease volunteering
or people may be reluctant to volunteer in the first place.
I am ready for your
Questions, Vanessa.
Thank you, chair. Um, thank you so much for your submission,
and I agree there's with so many elements of, um,
of what you've put forward.
Mm. Um, this was something I was, you know, looking at
behind the scenes as, you know, ideas
for members bills and things like that.
Um, the things that, um, tripped me up along the way mm-hmm.
Was the, um, the potential broadening of, um,
the scope of a CC, um,
because, um, doing that frankly increases liability.
Um, and also it's, it wouldn't, it would be very difficult
to ring fence just, um, volunteer firefighters, um,
without including, um, volunteer paramedics.
Um, also, um, other health professionals that work, um,
that are called in, um, various things like that.
So this, it's, um,
although I can see how you would, um, see it limited
to advice, I think that, um, can you understand
that it would be potentially quite hard to limit it.
The issue that I'm here to speak to today Yeah.
Is, is the volunteer firefighter
Aspect. Yeah. Yeah.
And so, um, the, the, as the thing is
that it potentially is quite hard to do that, um, without
then creating the precedent
or the, the creep that then carries on.
Um, and so the, it does create liability
and that's pars partially why there may have been some
reluctance in the past to do this.
Um, yeah. So that's just my point and my question, I guess.
Yeah.
Okay. Any other questions? Yeah, Palm sheet Palm.
Yeah. So you mentioned, uh, gradual, uh, injury.
Mm. And, uh, uh, are you like, uh,
are you, uh, be able to be a bit more specific,
what you're trying to cover, what you're trying to advocate
for in the gradual injuries?
Um, you've mentioned mental health mm-hmm.
Occupational illness,
but then can you be a bit more
specific for our understanding?
Yes, of course. And I think Bill may be a better placed
to expand on that.
Is that acceptable for me to comment? Yeah, thank you.
Well, the, um, I, I think the first thing is
that the legislation
and some parts has specific provisions for employees
and it speaks to the workplace.
Um, and so the precedent set there in terms of recognizing
that, um, within, uh, the exposure to certain hazards and,
and, and work, um, that the specific cover mentioned in a c
around, uh, mental health, um, mucus scle injuries,
that sort of thing, and, and certain cancers.
Um, so if that applies to the paid employees, um,
the volunteers that are doing exactly the same work
because of the nature of their engagement with FES
that aren't qualified because they're not employees,
but the, the Fine Emergency Act
and the government at the time contemplating contemplated,
um, establishing funds with volunteers in mind to be
of a nature of employees, but engaged rather than employed.
So to be treated equally like their paid counterparts.
And that's what's unique about the fire
and emergency arrangement.
And, and while we understand the,
the potential scope creep in terms
of other emergency services, I,
I don't think it would necessarily be that, that extensive,
uh, you mentioned paramedics,
but there's also, uh, red Cross, there's surf life saving.
Yeah. We understand that.
But, but, but given there are other interventions
to prevent this harm, you know, with,
with psychological support
and all the rest of it, it doesn't necessarily mean
that there's gonna be a huge amount of cases.
In fact, you know, um, it's, it's probably not
that widespread, but when it does happen,
people are left without cover.
And, and the, the particular case in Kingston with Mr.
Ottley is a very good example of that, where, you know, he,
he's probably not gonna work again.
And, um, and yet he's
provided all of this support
to the community, uh, for these years.
So we think that there is a clear case, um,
because the precedents actually set in the Foreign Emergency
Act, New Zealand, um, to, to FE funds as required
as a crown entity actually to apply the principles
of a good employer to the volunteers
as if they were employees.
So that speaks to the intention of government in the day.
Mm-hmm. She was brought cross party support for that.
Yeah. But it was also set up in a time when they didn't
have mental health as part of a CC
No, that act.
Um, Catherine, I really appreciate the role of volunteer,
uh, firefighters across my electorate.
I think we have eight volunteer fire brigades and try
and go to many of the, uh, celebration
and recognition e evenings.
We've got another one coming up
for the Harvard of Fire Brigade.
Um, in a couple weeks time, has there been any conversation
with FE around if this was to occur, how,
um, FE could pay the, uh,
essentially component that they would pay
for paid firefighters, um, to a CC?
Because as you'd appreciate for in the employee realm, um,
businesses, organizations pay into the scheme.
And while I appreciate
that volunteer firefighters don't earn a salary, um,
has there been any conversation around
how there could be a calculation by funds of the a CC levy?
It would pay for its, um, volunteer, uh,
firefighters into the scheme if
something like this was to go ahead. Mm-hmm.
Uh, no direct conversations with FES as of yet,
but FES presented a submission on this petition.
Yep. Uh, and they did allude to conversations being needed
around funding options.
So there's
Recognition. So they're not, they're
not, Unwin
Hasn't happened yet. Yeah.
Correct. Mm-hmm. Um, grant,
Yeah, I, um, I really respect and appreciate all the work.
Volunteer firefighters do the, they
my local township Mongo's right next to State Highway one,
and they unfortunately get quite a bit of
business, if you want to put it that way.
Mm-hmm. Because it's so close to State Highway.
Um, so is, is it having an impact?
Is this having an impact on the ability
to recruit volunteers?
Are you seeing any direct correlation?
This issue is becoming more widely known.
Volunteers are understanding the personal risk
that they're taking on,
and the more it becomes well known,
the more this will impact the decisions that they make.
Um, I find it pretty unreasonable
that we would put people into this position
where they're expected and required, um,
but then also put them in a position
where they are financially vulnerable,
where their livelihoods are potentially at stake,
should they, should they suffer through the course
of this unpaid work.
Um, it, it seems a very unreasonable place to leave people.
Thank I really appreciate. Thank you.
C can I add to your ques Yeah. That answer?
Yeah, please, please. That, that it's also an issue
of retention and, uh, the, the big threat
for finding meet in New Zealand is the changing nature
of volunteerism where it's become
across the country, across the country.
New Zealand is a volunteering nation,
but for, for, for volunteer firefighters, they are,
they are starting to feel undervalued given the,
the tremendous increase in work
that's occurred over the last few and those processes.
So I think it's an issue of retention as well.
And that goodwill needs to be maintained,
otherwise we're gonna have to find another
$800 million paid professional. Yep.
Yeah. Thank you. Really appreciate you.
Thank you for coming. Mm. Thank I just
Want, um, very quick one. Um,
our volunteers, um, do they have the same access
to the fire service medicals?
They do. Okay. Thank you.
And there is provision through fire
and emergency for wellbeing support.
Yeah. It just doesn't extend to financial support.
Right. Thank you. Okay.
Any other questions? Thank you, Catherine.
Appreciate the time you've
taken to present to the committee.
Appreciate the work that you
and your colleagues do across the country,
and we will take into consideration what's being presented
and, uh, report back to the house.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for your time. Thank you.
We're now moving into private, so.